blog/the-vastness-and-melancholy-of-space-tunes.md, before:

---
title: The Vastness and Melancholy of Space Tunes
description: A music review.
published: true
date: January 21st 2021
author: Nicholas Little
img: http://kolajmagazine.com/artistdirectory/wp-content/uploads/2017/02/shawn-marie-hardy-singing-the-body-electric.jpg
category: Music Review
instagram: whiskey_pharroah
facebook:
twitter:
imgCredit: Shawn Marie Hardy
tags: music-review, opinion
---

# An intricate, swirling feeling that we can all relate to, yet struggle to communicate;

a state of subtle, unlocatable sadness, or unshakable loneliness,
melancholy is possibly the most complex and profound feeling a human being can
experience. Over the ages, artists, intellectuals and even psychologists have stayed
steadily interested in developing an outlet to express and engage with the unique
qualities of such a curious feeling. The Danish philosopher, Soren Kierkegaard,
regarded melancholy as a naturally underlying part of what it means to be human.
Kierkegaard, well known as a self-proclaimed melancholic, speaks to the mysterious
and inexpressible nature of such a feeling through his various writings. He believed the
experience of melancholy did not pertain to a definite emotion, but to a state of being.
Plato thought of melancholy as a peculiarly spiritual state, in that a soul washed over by
waves of melancholy became, in those moments, more susceptible to the registering of
ethereal or esoteric experiences.*


It seems, to me anyways, that music has continually stood as the most precise
medium for capturing and displaying the way melancholy undetectably pierces through
the security or comfortability of our very existence. I have chosen to review a few songs
that not only do a brilliant job at expressing the sound of the melancholy but do so
through an interesting method of conveying themes and feelings of the expansive outer
space that envelopes our planet. There seems to be a powerful overlapping of the
existential feelings engendered by a perpetually expanding universe we find ourselves
placed somewhere within, and this feeling of a covertly present melancholic-loneliness,

confusion and yearning. Our interest in the unknown of space can be compared with the
need to know ourselves in entirety, exploring our deepest emotions in the same way our
telescopes and spacecrafts hope to uncover the dazzling truths of our galactic
inhabitance. There is a lot to be explored within the relationship of existing within a vast
universe and the feelings of melancholy, and I believe these songs, in particular,
beautifully articulate this connection.





# 1. Ladies and Gentlemen We Are Floating In Space - Spiritualized (1997)

<iframe src="https://open.spotify.com/embed/track/0fOjUafaAhJV16oRBgCtz7" width="300" height="380" frameborder="0" allowtransparency="true" allow="encrypted-media"></iframe>


Sonically, there is a lot going on in this song by Spiritualized. There are many
layers of voices that echo almost like mantras throughout the song, while in the
background there are various beeping sounds representing space-equipment-type-
noises that one could imagine can be heard inside some sort of vessel or transmission
system. Blatant in the title, the song is an ode to the fact that we are in fact ‘floating in
space’ and our habitat on earth is not as stagnant and fixed as we assume it to be. The
uncertainty of our interstellar positioning creates a complex, perhaps daunting,
background which always exists just behind the earth-bound lives that we lead.

> Everything happens today
<br/>And we're out here in space
<br/>And I don't know where we are all going

Beautifully orchestrated, the song is somber in nature, replicating the depths of a
melancholic experience. The song crafts a sort of existential notion that we do not know
exactly where we are going or what is happening in the big picture, while
simultaneously, reminding us of the powerful human emotions we grapple with on a
daily basis; that of love and pain.


# 2. Andromeda - Weyes Blood (2019)

<iframe src="https://open.spotify.com/embed/track/51EMSRpNm9Rg5rGViVCczv" width="300" height="380" frameborder="0" allowtransparency="true" allow="encrypted-media"></iframe>

The extremely talented Natalie Mering, the lead voice of Weyes Blood, has a
mystifying timber to her voice that draws the listener closer to both the hypnotizing
tones and esoteric texture of this colourful acknowledgment of our neighbouring galaxy,
Andromeda. The chords that start the song are very alive. They have a wavy,
magnetizing feeling, as if they are pulling you towards some sort of cosmic secret,
untethering you from the confines of gravity. The song is constructed through a perfect
balance of beauty and distress. While listening, your heart, like an astronaut floating
aimlessly in the emptiness of space, desperately yearns to grasp at anything solid to
reestablish some sense of ground.

> Runnin' from my own life now
<br/>I'm really turnin' some time
<br/>Looking up to the sky for something I may never find

Similar to the effects of melancholy, there appears to
be a sorrowful tone emanating outwards from the center of the tune, but when
investigated further, it seems to disappear within the vibrant atmosphere that surrounds
it. Although our larger, neighbouring galaxy swirls with the life of millions of starts, there
are no guarantees that it contains any of the remedies needed to treat the most curious
anxieties we face here in our own, ever-evolving, galaxy. Still though, it sure is beautiful.


# 3. Space Song - Beach House (2015)

<iframe src="https://open.spotify.com/embed/track/7H0ya83CMmgFcOhw0UB6ow" width="300" height="380" frameborder="0" allowtransparency="true" allow="encrypted-media"></iframe>


This song truly is a marvel. The instrumental interlude sets a stage that is both
familiar and warm, yet somehow simultaneously distant, like a dream that you suddenly
remember just enough to realize that you have forgotten it. It is this feeling, somewhere
between amnesia and homesickness, that Beach House leaves swimming in your mind
throughout the entirety of the tune. One of the prevalent themes, that of the orientation
of one’s placement or positioning, is tenderly spoken through a chill inducing chorus that
rings through the ears like chant mediation.

> What makes this fragile world go 'round?
<br/>Were you ever lost?
<br/>Was she ever found?

Since the beginning of human
consciousness, one of the main questions has always been: where do we fit in all of
this? This song calmy reminds the listener, as a mother comforts a young one who
knows little about the world they exist in, that although we may experience the soul-
sadness of never truly knowing an answer to that timeless question, we will always be
exactly where we are, wherever we are. The spatial and temporal ambiguity of our exact
location or direction can surely bring about an unsettling feeling in anyone pondering
such matters. This feeling can be mollified by the unifying reality that we are all in the
same situation. The Space Song reassures the point that: we are lost together…all
trying to find our place.



# 4. Space Oddity - David Bowie (1969)

<iframe src="https://open.spotify.com/embed/track/72Z17vmmeQKAg8bptWvpVG" width="300" height="380" frameborder="0" allowtransparency="true" allow="encrypted-media"></iframe>

Created by the eccentric and dazzling David Bowie, comes perhaps the most
well known and celebrated musical representation of the emotional trials of space travel.
His Space Oddity paints a vivid picture of an astronaut leaving everything he knows
behind to venture into the vacuous depths of the outer realms of existence. Largely
inspired by the ground-breaking Kubrick film, (and most definitely, loopy drug binges),
this tune palpably instills a sense of yearning for something beyond our limited scope of
understanding. In order to truly discover the unknowable, we must take a leap of faith
and travel far from the places we feel most secure.

> Though I'm past one hundred thousand miles
<br/>I'm feeling very still
<br/>And I think my spaceship knows which way to go

Naturally, there will always be a
special sort of sadness that follows such a departure from the safety and comfort of the
“normal”. The loneliness of such an exertion reverberates within the beauty of this song.
New horizons are the result of familiar ones left behind. Daunting and sometimes even
unfathomable, the deepest trips, the ones where you cannot take anybody but yourself,
are often the ones you learn the most.



# 5. The Lovely Universe - Circulatory System (2001)

<iframe src="https://open.spotify.com/embed/track/6pXKYAMqsF1cQtFHVloCYM" width="300" height="380" frameborder="0" allowtransparency="true" allow="encrypted-media"></iframe>

I wanted to end this list off with a more uplifting tone, so I figured I could
incorporate the beautifully optimistic aspects of melancholy within this final review, a
song by Circulatory System. Along with the UFO beeps and ominous static, creating a
listening experience that feels distant from our planet, this song at times has a sort of
carnival-like sound to it, highlighting the peculiar and extravagant nature of the universe.

> In us all, it's a lovely Universe
<br/>In us all, you'll be fine


It speaks to the consoling fact that, although we may find ourselves in the thick of a
cavernous melancholic state from time to time, it is a feeling that we all live with; one
that brings us back to the roots of what it means to be having a human experience. The
lyrics promote a sense of solidarity, reminding you that you are not alone when treading
through overwhelming states of bewilderment, while at the same time, urging you to
courageously break past the limitations of conventional ways of thinking or experiencing
the world around you.


# Delicate, complex and deeply mysterious, the state of melancholy evades linguist description, inspiring artistic endeavours, and encouraging uninhibited communication in order to express itself.

This experience of melancholy, one in which mirrors the feelings
of loneliness or confusion when contemplating your place in the expansive cosmos,
leads to profound states of wonder and a primal yearning for wisdom of the unknown.
This calling, not only to explore the farthest reaches of space, but the deepest parts of
our very souls, is what advances all experience forward towards life’s deepest and most
remarkable truths. Next time you feel yourself feeling existentially lost, aimlessly sad or
anxiety stricken by the absurdity of all that is unknown, remember; those feelings are
part of a grander, endless wonderment for such a magical, strange and lovely universe.

Commit message:

nicks post: fixed 1 formatting issue, added citation

blog/the-vastness-and-melancholy-of-space-tunes.md, after:

---
title: The Vastness and Melancholy of Space Tunes
description: A music review.
published: true
date: January 21st 2021
author: Nicholas Little
img: http://kolajmagazine.com/artistdirectory/wp-content/uploads/2017/02/shawn-marie-hardy-singing-the-body-electric.jpg
category: Music Review
instagram: whiskey_pharroah
facebook:
twitter:
imgCredit: Shawn Marie Hardy
tags: music-review, opinion
---

# An intricate, swirling feeling that we can all relate to, yet struggle to communicate;

A state of subtle, unlocatable sadness, or unshakable loneliness,
melancholy is possibly the most complex and profound feeling a human being can
experience. Over the ages, artists, intellectuals and even psychologists have stayed
steadily interested in developing an outlet to express and engage with the unique
qualities of such a curious feeling. The Danish philosopher, Soren Kierkegaard,
regarded melancholy as a naturally underlying part of what it means to be human.
Kierkegaard, well known as a self-proclaimed melancholic, speaks to the mysterious
and inexpressible nature of such a feeling through his various writings. He believed the
experience of melancholy did not pertain to a definite emotion, but to a state of being.
Plato thought of melancholy as a peculiarly spiritual state, in that a soul washed over by
waves of melancholy became, in those moments, more susceptible to the registering of
ethereal or esoteric experiences.*


It seems, to me anyways, that music has continually stood as the most precise
medium for capturing and displaying the way melancholy undetectably pierces through
the security or comfortability of our very existence. I have chosen to review a few songs
that not only do a brilliant job at expressing the sound of the melancholy but do so
through an interesting method of conveying themes and feelings of the expansive outer
space that envelopes our planet. There seems to be a powerful overlapping of the
existential feelings engendered by a perpetually expanding universe we find ourselves
placed somewhere within, and this feeling of a covertly present melancholic-loneliness, confusion and yearning.

Our interest in the unknown of space can be compared with the
need to know ourselves in entirety, exploring our deepest emotions in the same way our
telescopes and spacecrafts hope to uncover the dazzling truths of our galactic
inhabitance. There is a lot to be explored within the relationship of existing within a vast
universe and the feelings of melancholy, and I believe these songs, in particular,
beautifully articulate this connection.





# 1. Ladies and Gentlemen We Are Floating In Space - Spiritualized (1997)

<iframe src="https://open.spotify.com/embed/track/0fOjUafaAhJV16oRBgCtz7" width="300" height="380" frameborder="0" allowtransparency="true" allow="encrypted-media"></iframe>


Sonically, there is a lot going on in this song by Spiritualized. There are many
layers of voices that echo almost like mantras throughout the song, while in the
background there are various beeping sounds representing space-equipment-type-
noises that one could imagine can be heard inside some sort of vessel or transmission
system. Blatant in the title, the song is an ode to the fact that we are in fact ‘floating in
space’ and our habitat on earth is not as stagnant and fixed as we assume it to be. The
uncertainty of our interstellar positioning creates a complex, perhaps daunting,
background which always exists just behind the earth-bound lives that we lead.

> Everything happens today
<br/>And we're out here in space
<br/>And I don't know where we are all going

Beautifully orchestrated, the song is somber in nature, replicating the depths of a
melancholic experience. The song crafts a sort of existential notion that we do not know
exactly where we are going or what is happening in the big picture, while
simultaneously, reminding us of the powerful human emotions we grapple with on a
daily basis; that of love and pain.


# 2. Andromeda - Weyes Blood (2019)

<iframe src="https://open.spotify.com/embed/track/51EMSRpNm9Rg5rGViVCczv" width="300" height="380" frameborder="0" allowtransparency="true" allow="encrypted-media"></iframe>

The extremely talented Natalie Mering, the lead voice of Weyes Blood, has a
mystifying timber to her voice that draws the listener closer to both the hypnotizing
tones and esoteric texture of this colourful acknowledgment of our neighbouring galaxy,
Andromeda. The chords that start the song are very alive. They have a wavy,
magnetizing feeling, as if they are pulling you towards some sort of cosmic secret,
untethering you from the confines of gravity. The song is constructed through a perfect
balance of beauty and distress. While listening, your heart, like an astronaut floating
aimlessly in the emptiness of space, desperately yearns to grasp at anything solid to
reestablish some sense of ground.

> Runnin' from my own life now
<br/>I'm really turnin' some time
<br/>Looking up to the sky for something I may never find

Similar to the effects of melancholy, there appears to
be a sorrowful tone emanating outwards from the center of the tune, but when
investigated further, it seems to disappear within the vibrant atmosphere that surrounds
it. Although our larger, neighbouring galaxy swirls with the life of millions of starts, there
are no guarantees that it contains any of the remedies needed to treat the most curious
anxieties we face here in our own, ever-evolving, galaxy. Still though, it sure is beautiful.


# 3. Space Song - Beach House (2015)

<iframe src="https://open.spotify.com/embed/track/7H0ya83CMmgFcOhw0UB6ow" width="300" height="380" frameborder="0" allowtransparency="true" allow="encrypted-media"></iframe>


This song truly is a marvel. The instrumental interlude sets a stage that is both
familiar and warm, yet somehow simultaneously distant, like a dream that you suddenly
remember just enough to realize that you have forgotten it. It is this feeling, somewhere
between amnesia and homesickness, that Beach House leaves swimming in your mind
throughout the entirety of the tune. One of the prevalent themes, that of the orientation
of one’s placement or positioning, is tenderly spoken through a chill inducing chorus that
rings through the ears like chant mediation.

> What makes this fragile world go 'round?
<br/>Were you ever lost?
<br/>Was she ever found?

Since the beginning of human
consciousness, one of the main questions has always been: where do we fit in all of
this? This song calmy reminds the listener, as a mother comforts a young one who
knows little about the world they exist in, that although we may experience the soul-
sadness of never truly knowing an answer to that timeless question, we will always be
exactly where we are, wherever we are. The spatial and temporal ambiguity of our exact
location or direction can surely bring about an unsettling feeling in anyone pondering
such matters. This feeling can be mollified by the unifying reality that we are all in the
same situation. The Space Song reassures the point that: we are lost together…all
trying to find our place.



# 4. Space Oddity - David Bowie (1969)

<iframe src="https://open.spotify.com/embed/track/72Z17vmmeQKAg8bptWvpVG" width="300" height="380" frameborder="0" allowtransparency="true" allow="encrypted-media"></iframe>

Created by the eccentric and dazzling David Bowie, comes perhaps the most
well known and celebrated musical representation of the emotional trials of space travel.
His Space Oddity paints a vivid picture of an astronaut leaving everything he knows
behind to venture into the vacuous depths of the outer realms of existence. Largely
inspired by the ground-breaking Kubrick film, (and most definitely, loopy drug binges),
this tune palpably instills a sense of yearning for something beyond our limited scope of
understanding. In order to truly discover the unknowable, we must take a leap of faith
and travel far from the places we feel most secure.

> Though I'm past one hundred thousand miles
<br/>I'm feeling very still
<br/>And I think my spaceship knows which way to go

Naturally, there will always be a
special sort of sadness that follows such a departure from the safety and comfort of the
“normal”. The loneliness of such an exertion reverberates within the beauty of this song.
New horizons are the result of familiar ones left behind. Daunting and sometimes even
unfathomable, the deepest trips, the ones where you cannot take anybody but yourself,
are often the ones you learn the most.



# 5. The Lovely Universe - Circulatory System (2001)

<iframe src="https://open.spotify.com/embed/track/6pXKYAMqsF1cQtFHVloCYM" width="300" height="380" frameborder="0" allowtransparency="true" allow="encrypted-media"></iframe>

I wanted to end this list off with a more uplifting tone, so I figured I could
incorporate the beautifully optimistic aspects of melancholy within this final review, a
song by Circulatory System. Along with the UFO beeps and ominous static, creating a
listening experience that feels distant from our planet, this song at times has a sort of
carnival-like sound to it, highlighting the peculiar and extravagant nature of the universe.

> In us all, it's a lovely Universe
<br/>In us all, you'll be fine


It speaks to the consoling fact that, although we may find ourselves in the thick of a
cavernous melancholic state from time to time, it is a feeling that we all live with; one
that brings us back to the roots of what it means to be having a human experience. The
lyrics promote a sense of solidarity, reminding you that you are not alone when treading
through overwhelming states of bewilderment, while at the same time, urging you to
courageously break past the limitations of conventional ways of thinking or experiencing
the world around you.


# Delicate, complex and deeply mysterious, the state of melancholy evades linguist description, inspiring artistic endeavours, and encouraging uninhibited communication in order to express itself.

This experience of melancholy, one in which mirrors the feelings
of loneliness or confusion when contemplating your place in the expansive cosmos,
leads to profound states of wonder and a primal yearning for wisdom of the unknown.
This calling, not only to explore the farthest reaches of space, but the deepest parts of
our very souls, is what advances all experience forward towards life’s deepest and most
remarkable truths. Next time you feel yourself feeling existentially lost, aimlessly sad or
anxiety stricken by the absurdity of all that is unknown, remember; those feelings are
part of a grander, endless wonderment for such a magical, strange and lovely universe.




Citation:

*Ferguson, Harvie. Melancholy and the Critique of Modernity – Soren Kierkegaard’s
Religious Psychology. 1995. Routledge. London &amp; New York. Page: 7. [Accessed on
Google Scholar.](https://books.google.co.nz/books?hl=en&amp;lr=&amp;id=5MJ3RrsG7QcC&amp;oi=fnd&amp;pg=PR7&amp;dq=Kierkegaard+and+melancholy+&amp;ots=q9FejrEX5q&amp;sig=pPUtdGI187niePkqjMpOGSDj_QE&amp;redir_esc=y#v=onepage&amp;q=Kierkegaard%20and%20melancholy&amp;f=false)
